hello everyone welcome to the QA of June
2019 how are you all doing man oh man
it's been so hot the last few days in
the Netherlands I understand why they
take afternoon naps in some warmer
countries because when it's above 30
degrees outside you can't really do
anything at least not here nevertheless
I've been looking at the comments again
and selected a few nice ones for this
month Q&A which is the fourth edition
already in this video I will talk about
pride and arrogance in stoicism first of
all thank you temple for becoming a
supporter on patreon very much
appreciate it I want to dedicate this
video to a question from one of my
patreon supporters named Huang saman
about pride and arrogance in stoicism it
was quite a detailed question and enough
food for thought to dedicate one video
to here's the question and a quote I'm
very fond of this philosophy but I also
consider you military value because of
this I think and I include myself
stoicism can be bound to arrogance I'm
sure you know what I mean stay away from
the common or vulgar topics determining
someone that insults you is out of
ignorance not getting offended by
disloyalty or ill-will you are better
than them it's like there's a very thin
line between virtuosity and arrogance as
this way of thinking often compares
itself to the rest of the world
encouraging feelings of superiority and
to accept ignorant or imperfections in
others Who am I to be that condescending
I feel myself often trapped in these
thoughts I often don't consider a woman
as worthy of me because of her beliefs
her way of thinking her interests and I
hate doing that it pulls me away from
most of people so I guess the first
question of mine is how can you find
good balance between potential arrogance
hidden in stoicism and humility in the
contemporary era and quote first of all
once a man I want to thank you for this
amazing question about the phenomenon
that
turns almost every spiritual
philosophical or religious pursuit the
question is challenging and I hope that
my answer can live up to the profanity
of it now the first thing that comes to
mind when I reach a question is
something called spiritual pride which
we see happen very often it's the
classical example of someone embarking
on a spiritual journey and feels
superior to others
as a consequence for example we see a
contempt engrained within religious
communities towards the non-believers
that are seen as merely lost souls to
actual wicked people that we should stay
away from as far as we can also we see
spiritual pride among practitioners
towards one another - which transforms
what could be a spiritual experience
into a game of one-upmanship these
people say look I'm more enlightened
than you I'm more God loving than you
I'm more grateful than you I'm
meditating more than you in the same way
Stoics could say to each other I'm more
stoic than you if one lives his or her
spiritual life in that way yes I think
there's a degree of arrogance involved
it's just the ego telling a story and
makes the practice of spirituality
nothing different from being let's say a
buffed bodybuilder that takes pride in
the ability to bench more in a weight
room than others or taking pride in
having a more expensive car than your
neighbors I'm not saying that this is
wrong it's just that I don't think that
this is what any spiritual practice is
about nonetheless people tend to make
everything a competition or at least a
way to distinguish themselves from
others and feel better than others again
it's the ego at work the ego is always
competing with other egos and only looks
at the world as better or worse inferior
or superior etc it's a never-ending
cycle and I think that a philosophy like
stoicism could actually be a vessel to
weaken the ego and be more compassionate
and humble marks are really is for
example if you read the meditations you
will see that he is a very humble man
especially for an emperor is selfless
sacrifices himself for the greater good
and actually wants us to not be prideful
but virtuous instead I've got this part
from a website called the daily stoic
and I quote this idea that humility
kills dangerous pride is at the core of
stoic philosophy Marcus Aurelius was
constantly humbling himself so the
purple cloak of his Emperor ship didn't
go to his head Seneca experimented with
poverty so his wealth didn't change him
or become a burden Cato would walk
outside bareheaded and barefoot an
appearance far below his station so he
wasn't corrupted by success and power
and quote as far as I understand you say
that stoic ideas like staying away from
the common or vulgar topics determining
someone that insults you is out of
ignorance not being offended by
disloyalty or ill will somehow implies
that quote-unquote you are better than
them well I don't think this is
necessarily the case it really depends
on how you see it
you could stay away from common or
thugger topics because we think that
people and the topics they talk about
are beneath us
I admitted when you read the ingredient
I acted as it's almost like he indeed
speaks from a superior position with
contempt towards the vulgar I don't know
if this was the case but if this was the
case I would say yes there is indeed a
degree of arrogance involved however we
could also look at the situation from a
place of wisdom we hang around long
enough with people that only talk about
sex
Netflix tinder and drink beer while they
are doing so for example we eventually
become those people now at some point
let's say you discover that this life is
making you miserable it could be the
booze it could be the pointless topics
it could be both you see that these
people aren't really going anywhere in
their lives and that you don't want to
be one of them instead of numbing the
mind with alcohol every night you want
clarity to read to work on a business to
do something good for society etc you
realize that life takes away second
after second so
don't want to spend so much time
discussing Kim Kardashian or sports on
TV so is it because you feel better than
those people that you stay away from
them or because you want to live a
better life because their way of living
the common way makes you miserable I
think these are two different things
also what Epictetus points out is that
we should stay away from a vulgar topics
if you want to be philosophers I quote
you must cultivate either your own
ruling faculty or externals and apply
yourself either to things within or
without you that is be either a
philosopher or one of the vulgar and
quote indeed from this statement we see
that the philosopher sets himself or
herself apart from the common people
Epictetus describes the vulgar person as
someone who isn't wise someone who
relies on these external things he
describes at the beginning of the
enchiridion this isn't good because
according to the Stoics we should focus
on the things that are within our
control and not the things that are not
in our control now here's the thing with
arrogance arrogance is an emotion that
comes from relating to other people that
aren't within our control thus when we
engage in spiritual pride and focus more
on feeling better than the vulgar
instead of keeping our attention to our
own faculties I think that we actually
aren't doing stoicism the right way in
this case being stoic has become just
another badge of honor to elevate
ourselves above other people instead of
improving our own position in the world
so by being arrogant we already make the
mistake to measure ourselves to other
people it's the look at me I'm a stoic
and therefore I'm better than you which
is nothing more than a covert way to
achieve a certain degree of reputation
among other people reputation is outside
of our control so this shouldn't be the
focus when someone insults you saying
that this person does that because of
ignorance doesn't have to mean that this
person is inferior it's simply the
observation that insulters either have
an opinion about something that they
don't know and
about or that the insult is a product of
not having their own faculty in order it
doesn't mean that you're better than
them I just see it as a human flaw that
we all have in a more compassionate way
such a stance is more acceptance based
instead of fault-finding
so to answer your question how can you
find good balance between the potential
arrogance hidden in stoicism and
humility in the contemporary era now we
have explored potential arrogance hidden
in stoicism I think that the solution is
very simple don't be arrogant be humble
in regards to judgments about other
people I would say that there's a
difference between stating the facts in
an objective manner and judging indeed I
think it's better to avoid the letter
personally I see that I've got many
flaws myself so Who am I to judge about
the flaws of others then it's not up to
me
what's up to me is my own faculty in the
contemporary era it's difficult to be a
philosopher in the way that Epictetus
describes it's a bit extreme I think
that most people nowadays are vulgar to
a certain degree and avoiding them all
may not be the best idea arrogance will
only push people away by replacing
arrogance with humility we might see
that no matter how vulgar someone is
there's always something about them that
we can admire even if it's just a fact
that they've been able to cope with life
especially because their lives aren't
blessed with stoic philosophy so that's
it for the public Q&A in the patron
edition I respond to a selection of
comments concerning the following topics
the Stoics and free will stop caring
what others think inner peace and
hateful comments being ugly and walking
away from toxic people thank you for
watching
[Music]
you